Vancouver Police have a controversial
new weapon in their arsenal it's a
weapon that could be used for crowd
control during the Olympic Games CBC
News broke the story today and Eric
Rankin has the latest reaction tonight
Eric well Vancouver police say it's
simply a new high-tech public address
system purchased use from another police
force for about seventeen thousand
dollars
critics call it a sonic weapon a sound
gun and fear it could be aimed at anti
Olympic protesters one thing is clear
it's loud irritating that's just a
fraction of its real volume the LRAD or
long range acoustic device can cost the
human threshold of pain up to 150
decibels imagine a car alarm louder than
a 747 jet engine and Vancouver police
are now the proud owners of a more
compact medium-range version of the
device the M R at the purchase of this
has nothing to do with the Olympics
certainly the Olympics are coming we're
expecting large crowds but we needed
this before the Olympics but critics
believe that's exactly why it's been
purchased to break up anti Olympic
protests developed for the US military
it was first used by US police to
disperse crowds at the recent g20 summit
in Pittsburgh and on ships to repel
Somali pirates Vancouver police insist
they'll mainly use the M rads other
advertised feature as an ultra-powerful
public address system to replace
bullhorns able to send a narrow
30-degree beam of sound over 300 meters
it was tested during the summer
celebration of light to warn boaters
away from the fireworks barge and it can
be used during natural disasters to
direct rescue operations but the BPD
won't rule out using it to control
protesters they could be used if the
situation arose you know we we like I
said we carry firearms not ever
expecting to use them but sometimes we
have to use them critics call it a
dangerous acoustic weapon the new Taser
if you have something like this that is
yet another high-tech gadget
that is being introduced on the public
sprung on us a few months before the
Olympics when we've all known for years
and years the Olympics was going to come
along that's a serious problem
this SFU criminology professor agrees
saying the audio beam could injure
bystanders who are not part of an
Olympic protest possibly causing hearing
loss even brain damage I think that
essentially what we're looking at is is
a very serious weapon now Eric given the
controversy our Vancouver Police willing
to turn off the sound gun function the
short answer no they insist this is just
one more tool in their tool chest along
with batons tear gas and real guns but
they admit to me they've yet to test the
sonic cannon function and critics say
they shouldn't even be considering using
it until all officers are fully trained
at its safety fully assessed Gloria Eric
Rankin reporting live downtown Vancouver